README.md, before:

# Naudiodon

A [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/) [addon](http://nodejs.org/api/addons.html) that provides a wrapper around the [PortAudio](http://portaudio.com/) library, enabling an application to record and play audio with cross platform support. With this library, you can create [node.js streams](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v6.x/docs/api/stream.html) that can be piped to or from other streams, such as files and network connections. This library supports back-pressure.

This is a fork of [node-portaudio](/joeferner/node-portaudio), refactored by:

* changing from an event model to a stream model;
* linking to the v8 libraries through the [Native Abstractions for Node.js (NAN)](/nodejs/nan) library to enable more portability between node versions.
* adding in local copies of libraries so that portaudio does not have to be installed preemptively.

Little of the original remains but I am very grateful for Joe Ferner for the inspiration and framework to get started.

This library has been tested on MacOS X 10.11, Windows 10, Linux Ubuntu Trusty and Raspbian Jessie (`armhf` architecture).

Note: This is a server side library. It is not intended as a means to play and record audio via a browser.

## Installation

Install [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/) for your platform. This software has been developed against the long term stable (LTS) release. For ease of installation with other node packages, this package includes a copy of the dependent PortAudio library and so has no prerequisites.

Naudiodon is designed to be `require`d to use from your own application to provide async processing. For example:

    npm install --save naudiodon

For Raspberry Pi users, please note that this library is not intended for use with the internal sound card. Please use an external USB sound card or GPIO breakout board such as the [_Pi-DAC+ Full-HD Audio Card_](https://www.modmypi.com/raspberry-pi/breakout-boards/iqaudio/pi-dac-plus-full-hd-audio-card/?tag=pi-dac).

## Using naudiodon

### Listing devices

To get list of supported devices, call the `getDevices()` function.

```javascript
var portAudio = require('naudiodon');

console.log(portAudio.getDevices());
```

An example of the output is:

```javascript
[ { id: 0,
    name: 'Built-in Microph',
    maxInputChannels: 2,
    maxOutputChannels: 0,
    defaultSampleRate: 44100,
    defaultLowInputLatency: 0.00199546485260771,
    defaultLowOutputLatency: 0.01,
    defaultHighInputLatency: 0.012154195011337868,
    defaultHighOutputLatency: 0.1,
    hostAPIName: 'Core Audio' },
  { id: 1,
    name: 'Built-in Input',
    maxInputChannels: 2,
    maxOutputChannels: 0,
    defaultSampleRate: 44100,
    defaultLowInputLatency: 0.00199546485260771,
    defaultLowOutputLatency: 0.01,
    defaultHighInputLatency: 0.012154195011337868,
    defaultHighOutputLatency: 0.1,
    hostAPIName: 'Core Audio' },
  { id: 2,
    name: 'Built-in Output',
    maxInputChannels: 0,
    maxOutputChannels: 2,
    defaultSampleRate: 44100,
    defaultLowInputLatency: 0.01,
    defaultLowOutputLatency: 0.002108843537414966,
    defaultHighInputLatency: 0.1,
    defaultHighOutputLatency: 0.012267573696145125,
    hostAPIName: 'Core Audio' } ]
```

Note that the device `id` parameter index value can be used as to specify which device to use for playback or recording with optional parameter `deviceId`.

### Playing audio

Playing audio involves streaming audio data to an instance of `AudioOutput`.

```javascript
const fs = require('fs');
const portAudio = require('naudiodon');

// Create an instance of AudioOutput, which is a WriteableStream
var ao = new portAudio.AudioOutput({
  channelCount: 2,
  sampleFormat: portAudio.SampleFormat16Bit,
  sampleRate: 48000,
  deviceId : -1 // Use -1 or omit the deviceId to select the default device
});

// handle errors from the AudioOutput
ao.on('error', err => console.error);

// Create a stream to pipe into the AudioOutput
// Note that this does not strip the WAV header so a click will be heard at the beginning
var rs = fs.createReadStream('steam_48000.wav');

// setup to close the output stream at the end of the read stream
rs.on('end', () => ao.end());

// Start piping data and start streaming
rs.pipe(ao);
ao.start();
```

### Recording audio

Recording audio invovles reading from an instance of `AudioInput`.

```javascript
var fs = require('fs');
var portAudio = require('../index.js');

// Create an instance of AudioInput, which is a ReadableStream
var ai = new portAudio.AudioInput({
  channelCount: 2,
  sampleFormat: portAudio.SampleFormat16Bit,
  sampleRate: 44100
  deviceId : -1 // Use -1 or omit the deviceId to select the default device
});

// handle errors from the AudioInput
ai.on('error', err => console.error);

// Create a write stream to write out to a raw audio file
var ws = fs.createWriteStream('rawAudio.raw');

//Start streaming
ai.pipe(ws);
ai.start();

```

Note that this produces a raw audio file - wav headers would be required to create a wav file. However this basic example produces a file may be read by audio software such as Audacity, using the sample rate and format parameters set when establishing the stream.

To stop the recording, call `ai.quit()`. For example:

```javascript
process.on('SIGINT', () => {
  console.log('Received SIGINT. Stopping recording.');
  ai.quit();
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Linux - No Default Device Found

Ensure that when you compile portaudio that the configure scripts says "ALSA" yes.

### Mac - Carbon Component Manager

You may see or have seen the following message during initilisation of the audio library on MacOS:

```
WARNING:  140: This application, or a library it uses, is using the deprecated Carbon Component Manager
for hosting Audio Units. Support for this will be removed in a future release. Also, this makes the host
incompatible with version 3 audio units. Please transition to the API's in AudioComponent.h.
```

A locally compiled version of the portaudio library is now included with the latest version of naudiodon that uses more up-to-date APIs from Apple. The portaudio team are [aware of this issue](https://app.assembla.com/spaces/portaudio/tickets/218-pa-coreaudio-uses-some--quot-deprecated-quot--apis----this-is-by-design-but-need/details).

## Status, support and further development

Optimisation is still required for use with lower specification devices, such as Raspberry Pis.

Although the architecture of naudiodon is such that it could be used at scale in production environments, development is not yet complete. In its current state, it is recommended that this software is used in development environments and for building prototypes. Future development will make this more appropriate for production use.

Contributions can be made via pull requests and will be considered by the author on their merits. Enhancement requests and bug reports should be raised as github issues. For support, please contact [Streampunk Media](http://www.streampunk.media/).

## License

This software is released under the Apache 2.0 license. Copyright 2017 Streampunk Media Ltd.

This software uses libraries from the PortAudio project. The [license terms for PortAudio](http://portaudio.com/license.html) are stated to be an [MIT license](http://opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php). Streampunk Media are grateful to Ross Bencina and Phil Burk for their excellent library.

Commit message:

Updated README.md. Fix issues with optional configuration on full duplex streams.

README.md, after:

# Naudiodon

A [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/) [addon](http://nodejs.org/api/addons.html) that provides a wrapper around the [PortAudio](http://portaudio.com/) library, enabling an application to record and play audio with cross platform support. With this library, you can create [node.js streams](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v6.x/docs/api/stream.html) that can be piped to or from other streams, such as files and network connections. This library supports back-pressure.

This is a fork of [naudiodon](https://github.com/Streampunk/naudiodon) by Streampunk, refactored by:

* Adding in local copies of libraries so that portaudio does not have to be installed preemptively (Linux and MacOS only).
* On Windows platforms, PortAudio is built from sources with [ASIO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_Stream_Input/Output) support enabled. The [Steinberg ASIO SDK](https://www.steinberg.net/en/company/developers.html) is downloaded during a pre-installation step and used with the PortAudio build. This means the necessary Node.js native module addon [build tools](https://www.npmjs.com/package/windows-build-tools) must be available in order to install the module.
* Two new streaming classes (AudioInOut and AudioAsio) have been added to support full duplex (bi-directional) PortAudio devices.

I am very grateful for Joe Ferner and Streampunk for the inspiration and framework to get started.

This library has been tested on Windows 7 but is assumed to still work on the following platforms: MacOS X 10.11, Windows 10, Linux Ubuntu Trusty and Raspbian Jessie (`armhf` architecture).

Note: This is a server side library. It is not intended as a means to play and record audio via a browser.

## Installation

Install [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/) for your platform. This software has been developed against the long term stable (LTS) release. For ease of installation with other node packages, this package contains PortAudio as a submodule and automatically downloads the Steinberg ASIO SDK during a pre-installation step on Windows platforms.

Naudiodon is designed to be `require`d to use from your own application to provide async processing. For example:

    npm install --save naudiodon

For Raspberry Pi users, please note that this library is not intended for use with the internal sound card. Please use an external USB sound card or GPIO breakout board such as the [_Pi-DAC+ Full-HD Audio Card_](https://www.modmypi.com/raspberry-pi/breakout-boards/iqaudio/pi-dac-plus-full-hd-audio-card/?tag=pi-dac).

## Using naudiodon

### Listing devices

To get list of supported devices, call the `getDevices()` function.

```javascript
var portAudio = require('naudiodon');

console.log(portAudio.getDevices());
```

An example of the output is:

```javascript
[ { id: 0,
    name: 'Built-in Microph',
    maxInputChannels: 2,
    maxOutputChannels: 0,
    defaultSampleRate: 44100,
    defaultLowInputLatency: 0.00199546485260771,
    defaultLowOutputLatency: 0.01,
    defaultHighInputLatency: 0.012154195011337868,
    defaultHighOutputLatency: 0.1,
    hostAPIName: 'Core Audio' },
  { id: 1,
    name: 'Built-in Input',
    maxInputChannels: 2,
    maxOutputChannels: 0,
    defaultSampleRate: 44100,
    defaultLowInputLatency: 0.00199546485260771,
    defaultLowOutputLatency: 0.01,
    defaultHighInputLatency: 0.012154195011337868,
    defaultHighOutputLatency: 0.1,
    hostAPIName: 'Core Audio' },
  { id: 2,
    name: 'Built-in Output',
    maxInputChannels: 0,
    maxOutputChannels: 2,
    defaultSampleRate: 44100,
    defaultLowInputLatency: 0.01,
    defaultLowOutputLatency: 0.002108843537414966,
    defaultHighInputLatency: 0.1,
    defaultHighOutputLatency: 0.012267573696145125,
    hostAPIName: 'Core Audio' } ]
```

Note that the device `id` parameter index value can be used as to specify which device to use for playback or recording with optional parameter `deviceId`.

### Playing audio

Playing audio involves streaming audio data to an instance of `AudioOutput`.

```javascript
const fs = require('fs');
const portAudio = require('naudiodon');

// Create an instance of AudioOutput, which is a WriteableStream
var ao = new portAudio.AudioOutput({
  channelCount: 2,
  sampleFormat: portAudio.SampleFormat16Bit,
  sampleRate: 48000,
  deviceId : -1 // Use -1 or omit the deviceId to select the default device
});

// handle errors from the AudioOutput
ao.on('error', err => console.error);

// Create a stream to pipe into the AudioOutput
// Note that this does not strip the WAV header so a click will be heard at the beginning
var rs = fs.createReadStream('steam_48000.wav');

// setup to close the output stream at the end of the read stream
rs.on('end', () => ao.end());

// Start piping data and start streaming
rs.pipe(ao);
ao.start();
```

### Recording audio

Recording audio invovles reading from an instance of `AudioInput`.

```javascript
var fs = require('fs');
var portAudio = require('../index.js');

// Create an instance of AudioInput, which is a ReadableStream
var ai = new portAudio.AudioInput({
  channelCount: 2,
  sampleFormat: portAudio.SampleFormat16Bit,
  sampleRate: 44100
  deviceId : -1 // Use -1 or omit the deviceId to select the default device
});

// handle errors from the AudioInput
ai.on('error', err => console.error);

// Create a write stream to write out to a raw audio file
var ws = fs.createWriteStream('rawAudio.raw');

//Start streaming
ai.pipe(ws);
ai.start();

```

Note that this produces a raw audio file - wav headers would be required to create a wav file. However this basic example produces a file may be read by audio software such as Audacity, using the sample rate and format parameters set when establishing the stream.

To stop the recording, call `ai.quit()`. For example:

```javascript
process.on('SIGINT', () => {
  console.log('Received SIGINT. Stopping recording.');
  ai.quit();
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Linux - No Default Device Found

Ensure that when you compile portaudio that the configure scripts says "ALSA" yes.

### Mac - Carbon Component Manager

You may see or have seen the following message during initilisation of the audio library on MacOS:

```
WARNING:  140: This application, or a library it uses, is using the deprecated Carbon Component Manager
for hosting Audio Units. Support for this will be removed in a future release. Also, this makes the host
incompatible with version 3 audio units. Please transition to the API's in AudioComponent.h.
```

A locally compiled version of the portaudio library is now included with the latest version of naudiodon that uses more up-to-date APIs from Apple. The portaudio team are [aware of this issue](https://app.assembla.com/spaces/portaudio/tickets/218-pa-coreaudio-uses-some--quot-deprecated-quot--apis----this-is-by-design-but-need/details).

## Status, support and further development

Optimisation is still required for use with lower specification devices, such as Raspberry Pis.

Although the architecture of naudiodon is such that it could be used at scale in production environments, development is not yet complete. In its current state, it is recommended that this software is used in development environments and for building prototypes. Future development will make this more appropriate for production use.

Contributions can be made via pull requests and will be considered by the author on their merits. Enhancement requests and bug reports should be raised as github issues. For support, please contact [Streampunk Media](http://www.streampunk.media/).

## License

This software is released under the Apache 2.0 license. Copyright 2017 Streampunk Media Ltd.

This software uses libraries from the PortAudio project. The [license terms for PortAudio](http://portaudio.com/license.html) are stated to be an [MIT license](http://opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php). Streampunk Media are grateful to Ross Bencina and Phil Burk for their excellent library. The software, on Windows platforms, will be built from sources with PortAudio ASIO support. During the pre-installation step the [Steinberg ASIO SDK](https://www.steinberg.net/en/company/developers.html) will be downloaded and used by the PortAudio build. The resulting binary **CANNOT** be re-distrubted without licensing approval from Steinberg. The Node.js module assumes the developer has a Steinberg developer account. Due to these restrictions and vague licensing requirements from Steinberg, this fork of naudiodon is intended for personal, non-commercial use.
